Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Blake Rober. He is
the Michael Pig. Grace, the 2nd Associate professor of
philosophy at Notre Dame. And today we're talking about
his book Political Humility, The Limits of Knowledge in
Our Partisan Political Climate. So, Doctor Robert, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Yeah, I appreciate that.
So, uh, I mean, let's talk a little bit
first about political knowledge, but uh I would like
to ask you to start off with what is
the main claim you make in your book in
regards to political knowledge?
Yeah, so it's um it's it's really a claim
about Americans and their interaction with political information right
now, um. So this may generalize to other populations.
I, I would suspect it does, but it's gonna
be kind of an empirical question whether it does
and um and how it does. And uh I
am um unfamiliar with uh or I, I'm not
aware of enough literature to really answer that question.
So the idea is, um, Whether or not a
particular person knows something is going to depend on
the details of the acquisition of the specific belief
in question, and specifically it's going to depend on
whether or not that belief is the product of
a reliable cognitive process. And reliable here means reliable
with respect to the truth. So any sort of
cognitive process that produces mostly true beliefs is going
to be reliable. A cognitive process that fails to
produce mostly true beliefs is not going to be
reliable. And in order for a belief to count
as knowledge, it's gonna, at a minimum, it's gonna
have to be the product of a reliable process.
And so the kind of the core idea of
the book is that um You might think of
it this way. Americans have kind of taken themselves
out of position to know very much about politics
because our politics have gotten so combative, so acrimonious.
Um, SO polarized or however you want to put
it, that our interaction with political information is no
longer truth-oriented, it's much more about kind of picking
sides and defending your side come what may. Um,
AS a consequence of this way of interacting with
political information, it's no longer true that any significant
percentage of American political beliefs are products of reliable
processes. As a consequence of that, very few American
political beliefs are going to amount to knowledge. Um,
SO that's like, uh, that was sort of jargonny
and long, but that's kind of the, the simplest
way to put the idea of the book. It's
sort of crucial to understand. That what I'm saying
about um the absence of political knowledge is a
contingent thing. It's, it's a byproduct of, of the
way Americans are right now forming their political beliefs.
Um, IT'S, it's in principle possible to have a
lot of political knowledge. The idea in the book
is that right now, given what we're actually forming
our political beliefs, we have to not have very
much political knowledge. Uh, SO yeah, that's the gist
of it.
OK, uh, yeah, we're going to break down some
of what you said there for the course of
our conversation, but political knowledge, what is it exactly?
What counts as political knowledge?
Yeah, good. So. So, so I mean something really
specific by that. Um, SO there are lots of
different kinds of knowledge. There's, you know, so knowing
a person, there's, uh, knowing how to do something.
Then there's also what episteepistemologists call propositional knowledge, and
propositional knowledge always gets expressed uh with the sentence,
you know, I know that it was raining, um,
so that, you know, the proposition that it was
raining, I know that it was raining as propositional
knowledge. Um, YOU know, I know that Austin is
the capital of Texas. There's the proposition that Austin
is the capital of Texas, that's propositional knowledge. The
propositional knowledge is always knowledge of that, and then
there's a proposition, and then the proposition is the
content of what's known. So, political knowledge is knowledge
of political propositions, and I mean something really specific
by political propositions. Political propositions are basically propositions that
are sort of argumentatively useful in the contest between
Democrats and Republicans. So the book focuses entirely on
the contest between Democrats and Republicans. And so there
are all these sort of standard examples of claims
made by one political side that are disputed by
the other side. The reason they're disputed by the
other side is because if these claims are true,
that gives support for the political positions of the
one side, right? So, um, the, you know, for
example, the claim that human beings are responsible for
climate change supports a bunch of democratic policies. These
are policies that Republicans oppose. Um, AND so if
it can be known that, uh, human beings are
responsible for, uh, climate change or something like that,
this puts Democrats in a favorable position because now
we know something that sort of, uh, um, can
be used to leverage power for the Democratic Party
or something like that. So political knowledge would basically
be knowledge that's sort of like argumentatively useful in
this way, it's knowledge of facts that are contested
by Uh, the parties precisely because, um, these things
would be argumentatively useful or useful for, uh, defending
the positions or policies or whatever the candidates of
one party over another. So that's the idea of
political knowledge.
So you said earlier that you focus on the
US and the American political system. Is that the
main reason why you focus on Republicans and Democrats
specifically?
I, I, I guess really the main reason is
um because the, the central thesis of the book
depends so heavily on the empirical literature, the actual
like uh um kind of scientific studies. Uh, I
just simply didn't have the time to really look
into all of the relevant facts that would allow
me to come to conclusions about other countries. I
mean, it's just, just, just, uh, managing this stuff,
you know, of course, like, you know, uh, Homebase
for me is the United States. So it's what
I'm already most familiar with. It's what I already
knew the most about. And even giving that starting
point, it was still a huge project, several years'
worth of reading. We're required to, to get in
position, even kind of start writing the book. Um.
And uh sort of extending the arguments to the
political situations of other countries was just um it,
I just didn't have the time to do it,
honestly.
No, that's fair enough, but do you have any
idea at all whether the conclusions you arrive at,
we, you arrive at in your book would also
apply to political contexts or party systems outside of
and different from the American?
Yeah, so I mean at least I can, I
can sort of like give you a, a schema
that would allow people who know about the actual
facts on the ground to come to a very
quick conclusion about this. So, the, the idea is
basically something like, um, if you look at any
country in which people are highly invested in politics,
and to the extent that people have started to
kind of identify with one political party or the
other, you're going to see, um, at least you
should see all the patterns that you see in
the United States, and basically those patterns consist in
forms of reasoning. That are no longer aimed at
truth or forms of uh or forms of cognition
that are no longer aimed at truth. What they're
aimed at instead is something like in the kind
of the paradigmatic case, what these forms of cognition
are aimed at is preserving one's um membership inside
of this identity defining community. So, you know, pick
any country. If it's the case that a high
percentage of partisans in that country strongly identify with
their political parties. Then what you would expect is
for the cognitive processes responsible for the political beliefs
in that country to be products of, of um
of cognitive processes that are aimed not at truth
but at uh kind of retaining one's membership and
that identity defining group. And then you would expect
that the resulting beliefs to be unreliably formed, and
you'd have the same conclusions about those political beliefs
as I have in my book about American political
beliefs. Um. And, and from what I know, I
mean, you do see this sort of like, you
know, strong identification with, uh, political parties in lots
of countries outside of the United States. Um, I
just am not nearly as familiar with that literature.
So I, I kinda, I, I try to, try
to keep my mouth shut about things I don't
know that much about, so. So, yeah, so I'm,
this is, I'm, I'm just speculating here.
Yeah, no, that's totally fine. I was just wondering
whether you would have any idea if it would
also apply to contexts outside of the US, but
that's perfectly fine. Uh, WHAT do words like liberal
and conservative mean? And I would imagine that in
this particular case, we would be talking about what
they mean also in the context of uh the
US. Correct.
Yeah, good. Um, YEAH. So there's, uh, there's, you
know, um, These words are adjectives, right, liberal and
conservative, and as adjectives, they describe sort of sensibilities
about things. Um. There are also the words liberals
and conservatives, um, and these, I think in the
American context at least at least kind of function
as labels. And so I'll be honest with you,
I'm kind of confused by the use of these
words, but so far as I can tell in
the American context, when these words function as labels,
they're very nearly synonyms for Democrats and Republicans, right?
So the liberals, the label is nearly a synonym
for Democrats and conservatives, the label is nearly a
synonym for Republicans. Or if it's not quite that,
it's maybe like, you know, Democrat and Republican implies
party membership, and maybe liberals and conservatives implies sort
of just liberals are the people who sort of
like the ideas endorsed by Democrats even if they
maybe aren't, you know, members of that party and
conservatives or something like people who like the ideas
endorsed by Republicans, even if they're not members of
that party, um. Uh, AS I say in the
book, I dislike these words because I think it's,
you know, if, if you, if you take liberals
and the words liberals and conservatives and use them
as labels, and then think about the words liberal
and conservative as adjectives, I think it's liberal literally
true that liberals are not liberal and conservatives are
not conservative. Um, SO, which is, you know, of
course, is rather confusing, right? If, if the label
liberals picks out a lot of people who are
not liberal and the label conservatives picks out a
lot of people who are not conservative, seems like
we could do a little better with our, our
vocabulary. Um, SO I sort of just avoid that
and mess entirely in the book by just talking
about Republicans and conservatives, or excuse me, Republicans and
Democrats. Because, uh, I think lots of Democratic positions
are actually very conservative positions. I think lots of
Republican positions are actually very liberal positions.
What are, what are liberal and conservative synonyms, uh
uh uh synonyms of left wing and right wing.
Maybe, yeah, yeah, I mean, um. Again, it's gonna
depend on like, You know, I'm not sure to
what extent the, the labels left wing wing and
right-wing pick out anything very principled either. Um, IT
might be that those are just sort of, at
least in the American context, just kind of synonyms
for Democrats or Republicans too. Um, SO, yeah, and
you know, these, these words get used an awful
lot by people who have not given very much
thought to what the words actually mean, and I
think in popular usage, right wing, left wing, liberals,
conservatives. These are just uh uh very loose attempts
to try to pick out people who are, you
know, roughly Republican and people who are roughly Democrats.
Right,
right, I mean, I asked you that question because
many times we hear people using those terms interchangeably.
Right. Mhm. Yeah, exactly. So
it might, it might get a bit confusing sometimes.
Uh,
uh, WHERE do we get our political information from?
I mean, what sources do we draw it from?
Yeah, that's so great. That's a very good question.
Um, So again, this is kind of an empirical
question, right? Uh, IT'S a, it's a question that
you can't answer um entirely from the armchair. You
have to sort of actually look at, at real
life, the real world and see how people actually
form their political views. Um. And one of the
things that I emphasize in the book is that,
I mean, so they are all variety of ways
you could come by your political opinions, um, but
as a consequence of just, you know, straightforward human
limitations, um, and as a consequence of basically our
access to the world by way of our normal
cognitive faculties, it turns out that in the best
case scenario, virtually all of our political information comes
to us by way of testimony. And by testimony,
I just mean we're being told what the world
is like politically by other people one way or
another. So this can be just sort of verbal
testimony where somebody just tells me, you know, um,
whatever it happens to be. Trump said yada yada
yada on TV yesterday. It might be testimony in
the form of writing, right? So I might read
this in the newspaper, I might read it on
a Facebook post. Um, MORE broadly, it might be
testimony in the form of, say, like statistics or
chart or a graph or something like that. So
the way I use the word testimony in the
book, um, if I look at a chart that
basically like, uh, you know, Plots, uh, open or
ocean temperatures across time or something like that. Um,
THAT would be a form of testimony too. So
testimony is basically the way I use it in
the book is Information presented by human beings um
to other human beings one way or another. Um,
AND so the idea is virtually, if things are
going well, if things are going as well as
they could be going, virtually all of our political
beliefs are based on testimony.
And how much can we trust other people when
they give us political information?
So, um, it's, it's going to depend on the
time and place and person, um, but kind of
one of the central ideas in the book is
that right now, unfortunately, we can't be very trustworthy
of other people when they're giving us political information.
And this goes back to something I was saying
a little while ago about The highly combative nature
of American politics right now and the fact that
a high percentage of Americans are identifying with their
politics right now. Um, AND precisely because it's the
case that high percentages of Americans are identifying with
their politics, it is right now, I think, the
case that high percentages of American political beliefs are
byproducts of unreliable cognitive faculties, and as a consequence
of that, anytime somebody is giving us political information,
we should be seriously worried um about the reliability
of the source of that information, um, and then,
then the upshot of that should be. Uh, SORT
of an attitude of skepticism or distrust towards political
information right now.
What are those unreliable cognitive uh processes I think
that that you are referring to there?
Kind of the, the, the, um, maybe the most
interesting or most widely discussed one right now is
what people call identity protective cognition. And identity cognitive
identity protective cognition is basically cognition aimed at preserving
one's membership in some identity defining group, um, rather
than cognition aimed at the truth. And so the
idea would be something like, um, you know, take
any group that you're part of, um, that also
sort of forms part of your, you know, self-conception
of, you know, who you are. And uh there
will be, um, at least in, you know, in
the case of many of these groups, part of
being a member of that group will consist in
agreeing with certain things and disagreeing with other things.
And the idea behind identity protective cognition is that
if you are a member of one of these
groups and identify uh with this group in that
way, your mind is going to handle information. Um,
IN a way that's aimed more at ensuring agreement
with the members of the group than actually cottoning
onto the truth. Um, AND this is going to
be more than anything else, uh, um, for the
purposes of basically preserving these relationships that matter to
you.
So should we assume that when people start talking
about politics, they are mostly unreliable?
Um, Yeah, and this is going to be not
so much um because you think like the, you
know, the individual person is mostly unreliable, it's gonna
be a byproduct. Of just this, you know, extremely
complex. Uh, I guess system in which information could
flow from person to person to person to person.
So, um, for the exact same reason, you know,
so an example I use in the book is,
I, I, I talk a lot about the border
wall between the United States and Mexico and this
question of whether or not, uh, this, the border
wall should be finished and The question, you know,
depends on all variety of questions about who's crossing
the border and how many of these people are
crossing the border and what these people are doing
after they cross the border and whether or not
the wall would really make any significant impact on
the number of people or the kinds of people
that cross the border, how much money the wall
is going to cost and how much money it's
going to be required to. To keep the wall
in service and yada yada yada yada, right? And
these are all fantastically complicated questions. Um, JUST as
if, just as, you know, I'm not in position
to sort of answer any one of these questions
by myself, right? It's not as if I can
go and, you know, so suppose I start wondering,
ah, you know, who is crossing the border? It's
not as if I can just, you know, get
in the car and cruise down to the United
States, Mexico border and sort of just like hang
out and watch for a while and get a
good idea of who's crossing the border, right? Um,
WELL, I can't do it. So if I want
to know that, I got to ask somebody. But
whoever I ask, that person can't do it either,
right? So that person's got to ask somebody. But
whoever that person asks can't do it either. So
that person's got to ask somebody, which raises this
question, where could this information possibly come from? Um,
AND to the extent that this information has come
from anything even approximating a good source, the information
is going to have to have come from many,
many, many sources that sort of like kind of
funnel together, right? And so maybe I get my
information from one person, but that one person has
gotten their information ultimately from this vast network of
people who are providing little teeny parts of the
overall picture. And so in the book when I
say I shouldn't be especially confident in the reliability
of the person who's talking to me, the skepticism
isn't so much about that person individually as it
is about the whole system. Behind this person's acquisition
of that little bit of information, right? So I
think that given the highly combative nature of American
politics and the way we strongly identify with our
political parties right now, basically the system is unreliable
and as a consequence of the system being unreliable,
none of the people in that system are reliable
either.
Is it possible for us to tell if other
people are giving us false information? In other words,
is it possible for us to avoid deception?
Well, so the, the empirical literature suggests that we're
uh really quite bad at this. Um, What we
might be good at doing is uh being skeptical
of information that conflicts with what we already believe,
um, being skeptical of information that somehow undermines our
goals or our projects and those sorts of things.
So, um, I think we're highly gullible, but the
form of gullibility is not just like, oh, I'm
gonna believe absolutely anything anybody tells me. Um, THE
form of gullibility is if somebody says something, That,
uh, agrees with my politics and, and doesn't seem
wildly implausible on the face of it, and doesn't
sort of like undermine any of my projects or
anything like that, then I'm gonna believe the person,
um, whether or not what they're telling me is
actually true. So the idea would be something like,
um, We have uh No real ability to check
the facts or tell when we're getting good or
bad information beyond whether or not that information sort
of is kind of what we want to hear,
right? Or what we want to hear is a
function of whether coherence is what we already believe
and so on and so forth. Um, SO yeah,
I think, I think that we're actually, uh, really
pretty poorly positioned to look at all the political
information coming our way and sort the good information
from the bad information. So it's not just the
testifiers are unreliable in this broken system, it's that
the receivers of this testimony we're also unreliable ourselves,
right? So we're getting all this bad information, you
know, the, the, the, the sort of um Output
is unreliable, um, and then we are also unreliable
at sifting the good information from the bad information.
That's at least that's my view.
Yeah, uh, what is political skepticism then?
Yeah, so, so this is like kind of a
term of art that I just introduced in the
book. Um, AND basically what I mean by it
is it's just a, a label for the central
idea of the book that in our, uh, kind
of current political environment, um, nobody is in a
position to know very much about politics or nobody
has very, uh, any high amount of political uh
knowledge. So most forms of skepticism. ARE just categorically
deny knowledge. Um, AND so in a and, and,
and the labels a little bit misleading in that
sense. At least it's misleading to epistemologists. So when
epistemologists hear the label skepticism, they usually, usually think,
oh, it's a view that says knowledge is impossible
in this particular domain. I'm not saying knowledge is
impossible. I'm just saying we have very little of
it. Um. And another way in which the term
is kind of misleading is usually an epistemology, skepticism
is kind of a, a, a sort of armchair
view where just like, it's, it's not just that
we, you know, can't know very much. Given our
contingent circumstances right now, it's that we can't know
very much or can't know anything at all in
the domain, no matter what our circumstances might be,
right? Um, AND if that's your conclusion, you might
be able to defend that conclusion from the armchair.
My view is important and different. My view is
that we have some knowledge, just not very much
of it, and my view is also that there's,
the, the reason for this is that it's a
byproduct of these contingent facts about the formation of
our political lis right now. Uh, IF we were
to stop identifying with our politics, for example, Then
it may well be the case that we'd be
able to engage with political information um in a
totally different way, rely on uh uh reliable cognitive
faculties rather than cognitive biases to process political information,
and then we would be in a position where
we actually do have a lot of political knowledge.
Uh, I just say that we don't right now,
and that's the skepticism behind political skepticism in the
book.
But what does it mean exactly for you to
say that we don't have much political knowledge? I
mean, we have some but not much. I mean,
we don't have much political knowledge in what sense
exactly, in the sense that we would need more
political knowledge to make proper political decisions like voting,
for example.
Oh, good. Yeah. OK. So, um, So I think
you can do all, I mean, you can make
your way through life perfectly well with almost no
knowledge um. So, I mean, just think of like
any sort of example, uh, whatever you're trying to
find your way to a restaurant and you get
to an intersection that you didn't expect on the
route, right? So you, you, your friend is giving
you direct and back in the day before, you
know, GPS and Google Maps and all that, you
know, you ask your friend for directions to the
restaurant and they ride it out for you and
it's like you take a ride at this street
and the left this street, and then all of
a sudden you come to, uh, a T in
the road. Um, AND that's not in the directions,
and so you don't, you know, which way do
I go? Uh, YOU don't know, but maybe you
can look at the two streets and looking left,
it seems like, you know, it turns from 4
lanes down to 2 lanes, and all of a
sudden it looks like it's a neighborhood, you know,
and it just seems kind of improbable that you
should go left. Um, AND so you turn right.
Uh, YOU know, in this sort of case, you
don't know that you should turn right. Maybe left
is the right direction, but, you know, given your
overall evidential situation, it looks more probable that the
right turn is the correct turn and so you
turn right. Um, THIS is a decision not made
not on knowledge, but on the basis of an
educated guess, um, and Start paying attention to like
what we do in day to day life, absolutely
vast amount of our decisions are made not on
the basis of knowledge, but on the basis of
educated guesses. And we can navigate the world really
pretty well on the basis of educated guesses. By
navigating by pretty well, I don't mean necessarily that
we make the right decisions, it's just that we're
perfectly capable of decision making in the absence of
knowledge. Um, So when I, when I talk about
political skepticism in the book, Uh, the idea is
not that we're totally out of position to make
decisions within politics, right? So the idea is not,
well, we have no idea how we should vote,
um, etc. ETC. It's that our voting and our
other political activity is going to be based much
more on educated guessing than it is going to
be based on knowledge. Um, AND our speech, uh,
in fact, when we talk about politics. In a
lot of ways, this is kind of the primary
concern of the book. Uh, I don't say this
in the book, but a lot of what I
was actually worried about in writing the book was
the way people talk to each other, um, when
they have political conversations and specifically. Uh, I, you
know, it's like family, um, conversations, watching people assert
with what struck me as, uh, massive overconfidence and
the various things that they were saying, um. So,
the political skepticism is meant to, uh, I guess
kind of undermine that mode of political interaction, instead
of just saying, you know, whatever about gun control,
um, you know, if we all owned pistols, the
world would be a safer place, right? I mean,
I could talk like that, or instead I could
say. Well, I don't know. I mean, you kind
of try to give some consideration that maybe support
my view and then say that, I don't know,
that sounds kind of reasonable to me or something
like that. But it's kind of like really hedgy
kind of thing where what I'm doing is conveying
to my interlocutor, that I'm really just trying to
do my best in the world, and this is
kind of just an educated guess. And I, I
don't really know whether I'm right, but this is
how things seem to me. Um, THAT mode of
political engagement is what I want to follow from.
Political skepticism rather than just like, oh, we can't
act, we can't do anything, just we have to
just, you know, ignore politics entirely. Um IT it
that was kind of rambling. Did that make sense?
Uh YES, I mean, but one of the reasons
I asked you that is because it came to
my mind that sometimes people argue on the basis
of, as we know, most people not having much
political knowledge and that possibly being a problem when
it comes to their political participation in voting, for
example. They, they pick up on that and try
to make a case on, on those rounds of
some sort of political epistocracy where they defend that,
uh, only people with a certain level of political
knowledge should be, should be allowed to vote or
part. Participate politically in different ways and of course,
many times it's also not very, very clear what
they mean by having a certain level or enough
political knowledge because, I mean, what kinds of things
exactly should people know so, I mean, you know
that, do, what do you think about that?
Yes, that's a, that's a good question. Um, This
one, on a, on a really kind of straightforward
reading of the book, you might think, oh well,
uh, this book is going to kind of count
against um any kind of argument for epistocracy because
Well, you know, epistocracy says, look, you should let
the people with political knowledge sort of like run
the country and then keep them who don't have
any political knowledge uh out of politics. But then,
of course, if none of us have any political
knowledge, well then, you know, we can't do it
that way. Um, IN fact, like I think the,
the main lesson in the book is it would,
at the, at most, if you're an uh if
you like epistocracy, it's, it's, um, just going to
recommend that you sort of change your description of
what the view says. So instead of the distinction
between, uh, instead of the distinction being between people
who have uh political knowledge and don't have political
knowledge, you'd want to draw a distinction between people
who have, um, who can make sufficiently educated guesses
and people who cannot make sufficiently educated guesses. So
it's still going to be the case that the
most politically informed people, so the people who've really
worked hard to try to get a grip on,
you know, whatever, whatever the issue is, you know,
is raising the minimum wage. Going to increase poverty
or something like that. Some people have worked really
hard on trying to answer that question. Um, THOSE
people are going to be able to make much
more educated guesses than me, for example, because I
personally don't know a whole lot about that, right?
And so, uh, if you like epistocracy, You might
just basically cash your view out in terms of
giving control to the people who are in the
best position to make educated guesses, um, rather than
giving control to the people who, who know. Um,
SO I think the, I think the book kind
of cross-cuts the debate between Advocates of epistocracy and,
and, and their opponents, um, if, if that's kind
of what you're thinking about.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but, but I, I mean then
you, you are not making a case or at
least you don't use the information and arguments you
present in the book to make a case for
any sort of epistocracy or do you?
Yeah, right. Exactly. Yeah. So I do not make
a case for or against epistocracy in the book.
Um, I think, I think the book is basically
neutral with respect to that debate.
OK. Uh, OK, so let's get into the Yeah,
well, maybe different people have different interpretations. I don't
know.
Yeah, exactly.
So, uh, let's get into the central topic of
your book and even the what the title of
the book refers to. What is political humility then?
Yeah, good. So, um, So I, I don't give
anything like a definition of political humility in the
book, and I don't really even want to give
a definition of political humility. I have to be
perfectly honest with you, uh, I think like on
a, on what I regard as kind of the
best definition of humility. Uh, WHAT I describe in
the book isn't really humility. Um, THE title basically
was picked because, uh, I think it kind of
resonates with, um, your average person outside of philosophy.
So the book was intended to be read by
a very general audience, people completely outside of academia,
much less, you know, uh, outside of philosophy. Um,
AND I think the title will resonate with that
kind of crowd. So basically what I mean by
political humility is, is just a mode of engaging
with politics where you acknowledge that you don't know
most of the answers and you, uh, you acknowledge
this to yourself, you keep it in mind yourself,
and you also make this manifest to people that
you're interacting with uh about politics. So when you
speak to people, You don't present yourself as if
you know things, you know well, you don't know.
Instead, you make it very clear that you don't
know the answers, um, that sort of thing, right?
So that's kind of, that's, that's what, what, uh,
that's what I'm calling political humility. But as I
said, I don't think that that's actually what humility
consists in. I think it's just a, uh, Good
enough label for marketing purposes, basically.
So how does political humility translate into behaviors like
voting?
Yeah, so, um, the main way it would translate
into behaviors like voting is you regard yourself as
making an educated guess when you walk into the
voting booth. Um, SO that's the humility piece, um.
There's a part of the book that goes under
the label political humility that I think really has
nothing to do with political humility. Um, BUT so
on my view, the, and this goes back to
our earlier discussion of the labels, liberal and conservative.
Um, I don't think the democratic platform, uh, you
know, sort of like forms this kind of nice
system of liberal views that just sort of like
fit together in some sort of like systematic way.
And I don't think the Republican platform has this
kind of collection of views that fit together in
any systematic way either. Instead, so far as I
can tell, the views, the, you know, the kind
of the planks, the different parties' platforms are just
totally, I mean, I think honestly kind of bizarre
collections of values and ideas um and policies. Maybe
they're not bizarre from a historical point of view.
I think you can kind of make sense of
all these things from a historical point of view,
but from a strictly sort of like intellectual point
of view. Um, I don't think there's anything, you
know, so like if you look like a system
in philosophy or something like that, and you're like,
OK, what I want to do is I want
to kind of drill down to like the core
idea of the system. And once you get the
core idea of the system, then you can sort
of just work out logically what the rest of
the system is going to have to say. If
it's the case that A, well, then it's gonna
have to be the B, and then therefore the
C, and then therefore D. And then there's a
sort of like a system that kind of hangs
together in this like, you know, coherent or logical
way where You can't just like swap things in
and out without messing up the system. Um, And,
and, in contrast to that, uh, so the metaphor
I use in the book is a salad, a
salad, you know, it's got all these ingredients. It's
like you can have, you know, iceberg lettuce in
there. But you could have used, you know, spinach
instead, or you could have iceberg lettuce and spinach.
You could have carrots in there, or you could
have used cucumber instead, or you could have carrots
and cucumber, you know, like when you look at
the ingredients of the salad, basically, any of those
ingredients, or look at the ingredients of two different
salads. Basically, any ingredient in one salad could be
put in the other salad and vice versa and
they could just be kind of interchanged almost at
will. Um, I think the Republican and Democratic platforms.
RESEMBLE salads much more than they resemble the sort
of systems that philosophers kind of aim at. Um.
Um, AND a consequence of this is, um, it's
like if you're looking at a philosophical system. Anywhere
you kind of enter that system because of the
way the idea is hanging together, if you like,
OK, this thing right here is definitely correct. Well,
if this thing is definitely correct, that's going to,
you know, if, if it doesn't entail, it's at
least going to strongly suggest that the other parts
of the system are correct too, because of their
logical relationships with one another. Um, AND if it
were the case that the Republican and Democratic platforms
were systems like that, you could pick your pet
issue, you know, whatever abortion or whatever it happens
to be, and then just turn the crank on
that issue and get the whole rest of the
platform, right? So if you think abortion is morally
permissible, you know, you could, you could say, well,
abortion is morally permissible, and then you could just
work out logically from that, you know. Whatever policy
for environmental regulation and whatever policy for border control
and whatever policy for gun control and whatever policy
for the minimum wage, and this is all just
be this kind of armchair exercise based entirely on
your sensibilities about abortion. Um, BUT it seems perfectly
obvious to me that the Democratic platform is not
systematic in that way at all. And the same
thing with the Republican platform, right? So if you
think abortion is morally impermissible, it's not as if
you can get from, from there to sort of
like You know, your, your favorite Republican view about
taxation or whatever it is. Um, SO this is
under the chapter of political humility, but um, Um,
the, the point of this is, um, people should
recognize. That they, even if they do can make
an educated guess about one question, you know, and
kind of the political landscape or something like that
or maybe a handful of questions. They should recognize
that they're still terribly positioned to answer other questions
in the political domain, um, unless they've, of course,
You know, looked into those questions too, right? So
my ability to make an educated guess about, you
know, whatever the minimum wage, for example, there's no
reason why that should give me any confidence at
all that I have any idea what we should
do at the border with respect to abortion. Or
whatever else. Um, SO that's the idea there. Right.
But if we have as little political knowledge as
you claim, then why do we tend to be
so confident in our political views and decisions?
Yeah, that's a, so that's a a big and
complicated question. Um. There's a, there's a, a pretty
big empirical literature, um, on this. Part of the
empirical literature suggests that a lot of our political
engagement, uh, resembles fanfare more than it resembles, um,
sort of like dispassionate, uh, concern for the truth.
Um, SO, you know, you, you, whatever you go
to. In American football game or, you know, uh,
European football, what we call, you know, a soccer
match or whatever it happens to be, and you
watch just the kind of passion of the fans
and the crowd and what animates them. A lot
of this empirical literature suggests that our interaction with
politics is passionate and dogmatic and belligerent, etc. ETC.
FOR the exact same reasons as you see these
sort of behaviors, you know, in a sports stadium.
Um, I think that's definitely, uh, part of the
explanation. Um, ONE thing I talk about in the
book, which I think is also part of the
explanation, not by any means like the full explanation,
and I wouldn't even suggest that it's the most
important part of the explanation. It's something that I
call, um, testimonial feedback loops. And essentially the idea
here is, um, Well, I should back up a
little bit before I even introduce the idea of
a testimonial feedback loop. So one of the things
the empirical literature is suggesting is that people are
kind of sorting themselves into politically homogeneous communities. They're
doing this in all variety of ways at the
extreme, and people are moving to places where they
don't have to have neighbors that don't share their
politics. So people will move across the country. I
mean, you know, you find stories in the news
about people moving from California to Tennessee because they
want Republican neighbors, um, and so on and so
forth. So there's that sort of like extreme sort
of thing. But then there's the kind of less
extreme thing where it just turns out that like
you don't really have any substantive relationships with people
who don't share your politics. So maybe your neighbors
don't share your politics and maybe you even like
You know, go to church with somebody who doesn't
share your politics, but when it boils down to
like who you actually really share life with, everybody
in your close circles shares your politics. Um, AND
when that sort of thing happens, you, you tend
to wind up in a situation where you hear
information from people who don't share your politics. It's
just that you never hear information from people that
you trust. Who don't share your politics. And so
then you wind up in these little homogeneous communities
they get called echo chambers or filter bubbles or
epistemic bubbles or different things like that and and
in these communities. Basically, all the information you're getting
from people you trust is information from people already
share your political views. Um, AND then one part
of the book basically talks about something that I
call testimonial feedback loop, which is something that's likely
to happen inside these communities. Where essentially, You tell
somebody something and that information kind of gets passed
around, and then that information gets passed back to
you and you don't realize that essentially you're just
hearing your own report echoed back to you. Um,
AND so, Our sense of how well supported um
a particular claim is, we often are sensitive to
how often we've heard the claim, the bed be
something like, well, I've heard that a million times,
surely I wouldn't have heard that so many times
if it weren't true. Um, AND in a case
where each telling kind of gets vetted and where
there, the all the tellings are sort of like
supported by multiple inputs. That really is a good
reason. The hearing it many times really is a
good reason to be highly confident that it's true.
Um, BUT if hearing it, like, you know, I
mean, imagine like, um, You know, I get an
idea and I write it down in my journal,
and then I read the idea to myself every
morning. And so, oh, you know, after a year,
I've just heard that idea 365 times. Why? Cause
I just read the very thing that I wrote
down to myself, 365 times. If my confidence gets
really, really high as a consequence of hearing that
idea that many times in that way, something's obviously
gone badly wrong. I shouldn't be any more confident
after hearing myself repeat my own thing 365 times
than I was after the very first time I
wrote it down. Um, BUT if I'm in a
community where I keep hearing the same thing repeated
over and over again, and it turns out that
the reason I keep hearing it over and over
again is just cause, you know, I said it
and then it eventually got repeated back to me,
and then it eventually got repeated back to me
again and again and again and again. And there's
sort of like no outside or independent check on
this information, just Constantly getting cycled around, then I'm
going to probably misunderstand my evidential situation and I'm
probably going to become much more confident than the
actual evidence, uh, warrants in that sort of case.
Um, AND then, epistemologists would, would quibble with the
way I just described that, right? Um, BUT, but
that's the basic idea. I, these, these, um, because
of testimonial feedback loops, loops where information just gets
repeated around and around and around like that. We
could have a very distorted view of how of
how well confirmed something is. And that's gonna contribute
to our upper confidence. Yeah. Sorry to interrupt.
Uh, NO, no, no, no worries. Uh, I was
just going to ask you, is there anything that
people can do to avoid that kind of situation?
Of course, I just not moving to a place
with the purpose of being, uh, of living in
a context where all people or almost everyone around
you is of the same political ideology. Let's say,
is already better, not doing that is better than
doing it. But, of course, people, uh, usually cannot
really choose wherever they want to live. I mean,
they are at least somewhat limited in terms of
where they can live. So, I mean, what can
they do about that? Because it might just Accidentally
be the case that they live in a community
where most people are of a particular political ideology
and not another, so.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. For the vast majority of people
moving to correct the situation is not going to
be realistic. And even, you know, even kind of
simpler things you might do are at the end
of the day, not going to be especially realistic.
I mean, so, so imagine like, you know, um,
I think like, well, jeez, all of my friends
are Republicans, except for this one person I know
who's a Democrat, and I know this person's a
member of a book club. And most of the
people in the book club are Democrats, and I
know what they read, and I bet I'll get
this kind of nice exposure to that way of
thinking if I joined this book club. So maybe
I'll just join this book club. And then, you
know, whatever, that's like. Uh, 2 hours a week
actually driving to the book club and hanging out
and coming home and then maybe another 2 or
3 hours a week, like doing the readings like,
oh, that's not a big deal. But it kind
of is a big deal. I mean, for most
adults, like we don't have 5 or 6 hours
a week. To give to something like that in
addition to what we're already doing, right? So we
could only do it if we probably took something
of value out of our lives in order to
kind of make space for that. Um, AND you
think of like sort of like other kind of
analogous things you might do. I think when the
rubber meets the road, uh, for an awful lot
of people given just the normal responsibilities of their
adult lives, um, changing their lives in this way
is really not going to be very realistic. Um,
I think it'd be, you know, it'd be awesome
if we could do it and the people who,
and I know some people who do stuff like
this, I think it's really cool and valuable that
they do it. Um, BUT for a lot of
people who just simply can't afford to do that
thing, I think their best bet is going to
be basically Trying to be really mindful of, so,
you know, for example, if you live in a
homogeneous community, you know you live in a homogeneous
community. I think it's probably a good idea to
just consistently remind yourself like, OK, given that this
is the community in which I live, and given
that basically none of us have any inputs from
another point of view, uh, at least from people
we trust, right? We all hear what, you know,
whatever, we all knew what Rush Limbaugh was saying
back in the day, right? But it's not like
we had any trust in him at all. And
so that sort of like didn't affect our way
of thinking about things. Um. So you know, if
it's the case that we know that we live
in these homogeneous communities where we're not hearing any
information from opposing points of view from people that
we trust. Then just sort of like being mindful
of the potential for us being pretty misled about
what the kind of broader evidential situation looks like
would be a way for us to, I think,
kind of, just kind of keep ourselves in check
a little bit. It's like, OK, you know, I'm,
I, I feel pretty confident and I mean it's
an example I use in the book is, is
like the communities in which I run. Um, I
probably have never once heard anybody say anything positive
about the border wall. Um. And, you know, as
a consequence of that, I, I, as just a
matter of my own psychology, it's very easy for
me to just start interacting with the question whether
or not we should complete this wall. It's just
like the most obvious question in the whole world.
As if it's just like, well, duh, like, obviously
we shouldn't, as if there are no considerations at
all that maybe would suggest, oh, maybe, maybe we
should think about doing this. Um, AND then it
kind of remind myself, oh, OK, right. So this
is my, my psychological response is probably at least
partially a byproduct of my being a member of
this homogeneous community and just hearing the same things
over and over and over again with no outside
input. Um, SO yeah, so there's, there's a sort
of like kind of self-monitoring thing that I think
is probably more realistic for people. Then, you know,
moving to Tennessee or or moving downtown or, or,
you know, joining the book club or whatever.
Yeah. So, uh, I think that this is something
we've already touched on a little bit earlier when
I asked you, um, how we can know or
on what grounds do we know that we have,
we do not have much political knowledge, but I
think that what I'm going to ask you now
is, uh, A different kind of question. So, uh,
what are you arguing exactly from an epistemological perspective
when you say that we have almost no political
knowledge? I mean, on what grounds do you make
that kind of claim?
The, I mean, the kind of crucial idea is
that knowledge requires that the belief in question is
a product of a reliable process. Um, AND if
it's true that the vast majority of our political
beliefs are not products of reliable processes, then it's
just going to follow straight away that the vast
majority of our political beliefs are fall short of
knowledge. Um, SO that's, that's really the core idea,
um. Now there's um There's a lot of debate
about the place of reliability and epistemology, um, but
almost all of this debate is about the relationship
between reliability and something called justification. There's very little
debate about the relationship between reliability and knowledge. Virtually
all epistemologists agree that knowledge requires that the belief
in question is the product of a reliable process.
And so the, so the, that's, that kind of
core piece of the epistemology is It, I mean,
it's about as uncontroversial as things get within philosophy.
In, in philosophy, everything's kind of controversial, right? I
mean, there's basically no claim at all philosophy that
literally everybody agrees with. Um, AND so if you
can find a claim that the vast majority of
people agree with, that's like by philosophy standards, like
that's really uncontroversial. So, so the, the kind of
core epistemological claim in the book is, is about
as uncontroversial as anything gets in philosophy.
But are you applying any specific theory of knowledge
in your book?
Yeah, so I'm really, I'm really careful about not
doing that. Um, SO, You know, there are, there
are all a variety of different theories of knowledge,
um, but again, the one thing that virtually all
of the different theories of knowledge agree on is
that reliability is required for knowledge. And so, almost
any theory of knowledge that a particular epistemologist likes,
they could just plug that theory of knowledge into
the argument of the book and it would work
fine. Um. So yeah, I tried, I, I, I
really, well, and I'll be honest with you, part
of the reason I, I was convinced myself by
this argument is that the argument didn't depend on
my own particular theory of knowledge. It's like, OK,
so maybe I'm wrong about the particular theory of
knowledge that I happen to like, but Get the
exact same conclusion from basically all the, the competing
theories of knowledge too. Um, SO I think, you
know, it's like, well, OK, so even if I
happen to be wrong about my own particular theory
of knowledge, given that basically all of the different
theories of knowledge are gonna say the same thing,
the conclusion seems pretty solid.
OK, so do you have any final remarks about
the book and what you explored or anything that
I might have missed with my questions or?
I don't know, your questions are awesome. Um, LET'S
see. No, I mean, that's, that's, I guess that's
basically it. The, um, I, I, so I guess
I should say 11 thing, so this is the
very last thing that I say in the book
that I think is um pretty important. There's this,
you know, academics can get kind of hung up
on um how we want to categorize beliefs. So
we categorize, you know, so I take a, a
particular political belief. Um, CAN we categorize it as
an item of knowledge or not? Can we categorize
it as a justified belief or not? Can we
categorize it as a rational belief or not? Can
we, you know, this is, it's super jargon in
terms. Can we categorize it as a sensitive belief
or a safe belief or a warranted belief or
not? Um, I think those are all really interesting
questions. I mean, it's kind of my job to
answer those sorts of questions, but the, the book
is, is really not concerned about the proper way
of categorizing or, at the end of the day,
the book's not really concerned about the proper way
of categorizing our political beliefs. Um, SO like I
said at the very end of the book, there
are a handful of people in philosophy who defend
the view according to which knowledge is true belief.
And on this view, if you're right about something,
then you know. And so, if I, you know,
I, so somebody says, hey, should we finish the
border wall or not? And I get out a
coin and I say, OK, if it's heads, I'll
believe we should, and if it's tails, I'll believe
we shouldn't. And so I flip it and it
lands tails and on the base of my coin
toss, I believe we shouldn't finish it. According to
this view, if I'm right, as on the base
of my coin toss, then I know that we
shouldn't finish the wall. Very, very, very few epistemologists
accept that view, but it is a view that's
defended in the literature. Um. If that view is
correct, then everybody who's right about politics knows and
it's only the people who have the misfortune of
being wrong who don't know. And so probably there
are lots of people on that view who have
a lot of political knowledge. Um, BUT the thing
is, on that sort of view, you could know
something while being in a position where you shouldn't
even be remotely confident that you're right. And it's
really this this question of how confident we should
be that I'm primarily concerned about in the book.
So I think in just like a regular old
English, you can nicely express that you shouldn't be
confident in something by saying you don't know. Um,
BUT it's the confidence piece that I really care
about more than whether or not our beliefs can
be categorized as knowledge. What, what I really want
to get across in the book. Is that when
you look at all of the different things that
Republicans and Democrats argue about, um, I think at
least right now, we shouldn't be very confident in
our answers to those respective questions. Whether or not
our answers count as knowledge or not, the main
thing I care about is that we're not in
a position to be very confident in our answers.
So I guess, yeah, that's 11 sort of like
final reflection, I guess I'd like to add.
Right, so let's end on that reflection then and
the book is again Political Humility, The Limits of
Knowledge in our Partisan Political Climate. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview.
And Doctor Rober, just before we go apart from
the book, would you like to tell people where
they can find your work on the internet?
Oh, sure, yeah. Um, SO I guess the easiest
place would just be my personal website, um. Which
is. Oh gosh, what is the URL? It might
be Blake Raber.com. Uh, SO just my first name
and last name.com. It might not, it might not
be that. You can, so if you Google Notre
Dame's philosophy department, there'll be a link to my
website there. Um, IF you just Google my name,
you'll quickly get to either my website or the
link on the department. Um, AND I have So
all of my, I, I think 100% of my
publications are either available directly on my website or
links to those things like to the book on
Amazon or through Rutledge or something like that. Um,
SO that'd probably be the, yeah, the easiest way
to find it. I'm sort of embarrassed. I don't
know.
No, no, I, I will, I will find the
website and link, link it in the description as
well.
So thank you, no problem.
OK, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been really
nice to talk with you.
Yeah, thank you so much for the interview. It
was really fun. Appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.